CHAPTER I The Proverbs of Solomon, the son of David,
King of Israel, to know wisdom and instruction, to perceive the words of understanding,
to perceive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment and equity,
to give subtlety to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion.
A wise man will hear and will increase learning, and a man of understanding shall attain unto
wise counsels, to understand a proverb and the interpretation, the words of the wise,
and their dark sayings. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, but fools despise
wisdom and instruction. My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy
mother, for they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.
My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. If they say, Come with us, let us lay
wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause, let us swallow them
alive as the grave, and whole as those that go down into the pit, we shall find all precious
substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil. Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse.
My son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path, for their
run to evil, and make haste to shed blood, surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird,
and they lay wait for their own blood, they lurk privily for their own lives.
So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, which taketh away the life of the owners
thereof. Wisdom crieth without, she uttereth her voice in the streets, she crieth in the chief
place of concourse, in the openings of the gates, in the city she uttereth her words, saying,
How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight in their scorning,
and fools hate knowledge. Turn you at my reproof, behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you,
I will make known my words unto you, because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched
out my hand, and no man regarded, but ye have said at nought all my counsel, and would none of my
when your fear cometh, when your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a
whirlwind, when distress and anguish cometh upon you, then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, for that they hated knowledge,
and did not choose the fear of the Lord, they would none of my counsel, they despised all my
reproof, therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices,
for the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them,
but whoso hearkeneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.